📄 TECHNICAL DOCUMENTATION — Premium Scholars Platform

1. Overview
Premium Scholars is a full-stack web platform built for university students in Kenya. It consolidates three distinct products into one unified experience: a beauty e-commerce shop, a structured mentorship program, and a first-year requirements ordering system. The platform also includes a live news board. Each section is independently navigable via a clean top-level route hierarchy, and user authentication is shared across sections so a student never needs more than one account.

2. Technology Stack
Frontend — React 18 with TypeScript, bundled by Vite. Routing is handled by React Router v6 using the declarative <Routes> and <Route> API. Styling is done entirely with Tailwind CSS 3 using a custom design token configuration. No UI component library is used — every component is hand-built for full design control. HTTP requests are made with Axios via a centrally configured instance that attaches JWT tokens and handles 401 redirects globally.
Backend — Node.js with Express 4, written in TypeScript and compiled via tsc. The database is MongoDB accessed through Mongoose 8. Authentication uses JSON Web Tokens signed with the jsonwebtoken library and passwords are hashed with bcryptjs at a cost factor of 12. File uploads are handled by Multer, which writes files to the server's local uploads/ directory. The directory is split into beauty/, requirements/, and news/ sub-folders which are then served as static assets via Express's built-in static file middleware.

3. Directory Structure Philosophy
The frontend uses a feature-based layout where each major section of the platform (beauty, mentorship, requirements, admin) has its own sub-folder in both pages/ and components/. Shared UI elements live in components/shared/. Service files in services/ are one-to-one with backend route groups, keeping the data-fetching layer completely decoupled from UI logic. All TypeScript types are centralized in types/ so they can be imported across service files, component props interfaces, and page state types without duplication.
The backend mirrors this structure: each feature has its own route file, controller file, and model file. Middleware is separated from controller logic — authentication, role authorization, and file upload handling are all independent Express middleware functions that are composed per-route. This makes it trivial to change authorization rules on any route without touching business logic.

4. Authentication Architecture
Authentication is centralized in AuthContext.tsx, which wraps the entire application. The context stores the authenticated user object and JWT token in React state, persisting the token to localStorage. On first load, if a token exists in localStorage, the context immediately calls GET /api/auth/me to rehydrate the user object. This ensures that page refreshes do not log the user out.
The ProtectedRoute wrapper component reads from this context. If no user is present and the route requires authentication, it redirects to /mentorship/login while preserving the intended destination in router state (location.state.from). After login, the Login page reads this state and redirects back to where the user was trying to go.
On the backend, every protected route passes its request through the authenticate middleware, which extracts and verifies the Bearer token from the Authorization header, fetches the user from MongoDB, and attaches the user object to req.user. Downstream route handlers can then safely access req.user without any additional database calls.
Role-based access control is enforced by the requireRole middleware factory. It accepts a variable list of allowed roles and returns a middleware function that checks req.user.role. This means access rules are expressed declaratively at the route registration level rather than scattered through controller code.

5. User Roles and Permissions
There are three user roles: admin, mentor, and mentee. All three roles are stored in the same User MongoDB collection, differentiated by a role field. This single-table approach means login, token verification, and user lookup all use identical code paths regardless of role.
Mentees can browse all public content, place orders (requiring authentication), and view their assigned mentor in the mentorship portal. Mentors can do everything a mentee can, plus they can view the list of mentees assigned to them and access their mentor-specific dashboard. Admins can do everything plus: create, edit, and delete beauty products and requirement items; publish, edit, and delete news posts; view all users and delete them; view all mentors and their mentee counts; search any mentee by ID; generate mentor verification codes; assign mentees to mentors; and view and manage all orders.
The strict separation is enforced both on the frontend (ProtectedRoute role arrays) and the backend (requireRole middleware on every non-public endpoint). The frontend enforcement is a UX convenience — the backend enforcement is the actual security boundary.

6. Mentor Code System
When a new user registers with the role mentor, they must supply a one-time verification code. These codes are generated exclusively by admin users via POST /api/admin/mentor-codes. The generation uses a crypto-random 3-byte hex string prefixed with PS- to produce codes like PS-3F9A2C. Each code is stored as a MentorCode document with isUsed: false by default.
During mentor registration, the backend looks up the submitted code in the MentorCode collection. If the code does not exist or isUsed is already true, registration fails with a descriptive error. If valid, the user is created, the code's isUsed flag is set to true, and the code's usedBy field is set to the new user's ObjectId. This creates a permanent audit trail showing which mentor used which code, visible to admins at GET /api/admin/mentor-codes.
Mentee registration has no code requirement whatsoever — the mentorCode field in the registration form only renders when the role toggle is set to Mentor.

7. Cart Architecture
The shopping cart is implemented entirely on the client using CartContext.tsx. There is no server-side cart — it exists only in React state and is mirrored to sessionStorage on every state change, giving persistence across page refreshes within the same browser session but clearing on tab close. This is intentional: it keeps the backend stateless and avoids the complexity of cart-to-order reconciliation on login.
Cart items carry a section field ('beauty' or 'requirements') so that the checkout flow knows which backend endpoint to call and which display context to use. The CartDrawer component renders as a right-side slide-over panel accessible from the Navbar's cart icon without leaving the current page.
When an order is placed, the backend completely ignores the prices submitted by the client. It re-fetches every item by ID from MongoDB and recalculates the total server-side. This eliminates the classic client-side price manipulation vulnerability where a user edits request payloads to submit lower prices.

8. File Upload System
All uploads are handled by Multer on the backend. The storage strategy uses multer.diskStorage which writes files directly to the server filesystem under backend/uploads/. The destination subdirectory is resolved dynamically from req.baseUrl — beauty image uploads go to uploads/beauty/, requirements item images to uploads/requirements/, and news post images to uploads/news/.
Filenames are generated as {timestamp}-{8-byte-random-hex}{original-extension} which prevents collisions and strips any malicious characters from user-supplied filenames. File type validation is enforced via a fileFilter function that checks the MIME type against an allowlist of image formats. Maximum file size is 5 MB per file.
The uploads/ directory is registered as a static file route in app.ts so files are accessible at http://your-domain.com/uploads/news/1234-abcd.jpg. The backend stores only the relative path (e.g. /uploads/news/1234-abcd.jpg) in MongoDB, not the full URL, so the application stays portable across different deployment domains.
When a product or post is deleted, or when an image is replaced during an update, the old file is deleted from disk using Node's fs.unlinkSync after confirming the file exists with fs.existsSync. This prevents orphaned files accumulating on the server over time.

9. News Board
The news board is a public-read, admin-write content feed. Admin users post articles through the Admin Dashboard's News tab using a simple form with a title field, a body textarea, and an optional image upload. Posts are stored in the NewsPost MongoDB collection and sorted by createdAt descending so the most recent news always appears first.
The NewsBar component renders across the top of the viewport as an auto-scrolling ticker that fetches the latest 8 headlines. It uses the same CSS animation as the review carousel (animate-scroll-left) and fades at both edges with gradient overlays. Clicking any headline navigates to the full /news page.
The /news page renders full posts in card format. The first (most recent) post is highlighted with a gold left border and a "Latest" badge. Each card shows the full post body, author name (pulled from the admin user's name field at creation time), the formatted date, and the post image if one was uploaded.

10. Admin Dashboard
The Admin Dashboard at /admin is a sidebar-driven single-page experience within the React app. The sidebar tabs drive a local tab state variable which conditionally renders different sub-panels, all within the same page without any additional route changes. This keeps the admin experience tight and fast since all panels are shallow React renders rather than full navigations.
The Overview tab fetches a summary from GET /api/admin/summary which returns total users, mentor count, mentee count, total orders, and pending orders in a single aggregated response. The Mentors tab shows all mentor accounts with their mentee counts, computed via a MongoDB aggregation pipeline. It also embeds a mentee-by-ID search input that calls GET /api/admin/mentees/:id — there is deliberately no "get all mentees" button in the UI, matching the specification that mentee browsing should be ID-specific only. The Users tab shows all users (admin, mentor, and mentee) with a delete button. Deleting a mentor automatically un-assigns all of that mentor's mentees via a User.updateMany call, leaving those mentees in the pool to be reassigned.

11. Data Relationships
The primary data relationship is mentor → mentees. Implemented as a foreign key on the mentee User document: mentorId: ObjectId(ref: User). This is a User document pointing to another User document — a self-referential relationship, which MongoDB handles easily with ref: 'User' and standard .populate() calls. The assignment is one-way: mentors don't hold an array of mentee IDs. Instead, to find a mentor's mentees, the system queries User.find({ mentorId: mentorId, role: 'mentee' }). This is more efficient than maintaining a two-way reference and avoids the risk of the two sides getting out of sync.
Orders reference users with a userId foreign key. The Order model does not embed a user sub-document — it stores only the ObjectId and populates name and email only when needed (in the admin orders view). Order items embed a snapshot of the item's name and price at the time of ordering, so historical order records are not affected by future price changes.

12. Environment Configuration and Startup
The backend reads configuration from a .env file. The required variables are MONGO_URI, JWT_SECRET, and FRONTEND_URL. PORT defaults to 5000 and NODE_ENV defaults to development. The env.ts config file provides a validated, typed export of all environment variables so controllers and utilities import from there rather than calling process.env directly throughout the codebase.
To start the project: first run npm run seed from the backend directory, which creates a default admin account (admin@premiumscholars.co.ke / Admin@1234) and seeds 10 mentor codes. Then start the backend dev server with npm run dev. In a separate terminal, start the frontend with npm run dev from the frontend directory. The Vite dev server at port 5173 proxies all /api and /uploads requests to the Express backend at port 5000, so no CORS issues exist in local development and the frontend can be coded as if it were on the same origin.

13. Security Considerations
Passwords are never stored in plain text. All password hashing uses bcrypt with a cost factor of 12, which results in approximately 300ms per hash on modern hardware — fast enough for UX, slow enough to be resistant to brute force. The password field in the User schema is set to select: false, meaning Mongoose will never include it in query results unless .select('+password') is explicitly called. This provides a safety net against accidentally leaking hashed passwords in API responses.
JWTs are signed with HS256 and expire after 7 days by default. The secret key is loaded from the environment and should be a long, cryptographically random string in production. Token expiry is handled gracefully: the frontend axios interceptor catches 401 responses and clears the stored token, redirecting to the login page.
File uploads are validated on MIME type before being written to disk. The multer fileFilter function rejects any file that is not an image. Filenames are fully replaced with server-generated random names, so any path traversal or injection attempts in original filenames are completely neutralized.
All admin and mentor operations are double-gated: the frontend ProtectedRoute prevents the UI from rendering, and the backend requireRole middleware rejects the HTTP request regardless of what the client sends. Disabling JavaScript or crafting raw HTTP requests cannot bypass the backend enforcement.

14. Extending the Platform
Adding a new section — Create a new folder in pages/ and components/, add a service file in services/, register routes in App.tsx, add a navbar link, and create the corresponding backend route, controller, and model files. The architecture is intentionally mirrored between frontend and backend to make this mechanical.
Adding a new admin capability — Add the endpoint to admin.routes.ts, implement the handler in admin.controller.ts, add the service call to services/admin.service.ts, and add a tab in the AdminDashboard sidebar with the corresponding render logic.
Payment integration — The Order model has a status lifecycle (pending → confirmed → shipped → delivered). A payment provider (e.g. Mpesa via Daraja API, Stripe, or Flutterwave) would sit between the OrderForm component submitting the order and the backend confirming it. The recommended pattern is: create order with status pending → initiate payment → payment provider calls a webhook → backend updates order status to confirmed.
Email notifications — Nodemailer or a transactional email provider (Resend, Postmark) can be integrated in the backend. Natural trigger points are: new user registration, order confirmation, mentee assignment notification, and news post publication.

How the Admin Invite System Works

The Full Flow (When Admins Already Exist)
The system is a closed loop. Here is exactly what happens step by step.
An existing admin logs into the dashboard and navigates to the Admin Invites tab. They optionally type the email address of the person they want to invite and choose how long the link should stay valid — 6, 12, 24, 48, or 72 hours. They click "Generate Invite Link".
When that button is clicked, the frontend calls POST /api/admin-auth/invite. The backend runs generateAdminInvite in adminAuth.controller.ts. It uses Node's built-in crypto.randomBytes(32).toString('hex') to generate a 64-character hexadecimal string. That string has 256 bits of entropy, which means there are more possible values than atoms in the observable universe — it is not guessable. The backend creates an AdminInvite document in MongoDB storing the token, the optional locked email, the expiry date, and the ID of the admin who created it. It then constructs the full invite URL: https://yourfrontend.com/admin/register?token=abc123... and returns it to the admin's browser.
The admin copies that URL and sends it to the intended person however they choose — WhatsApp, email, in person, it does not matter. The URL itself is the credential.
The recipient clicks the link. Their browser opens /admin/register?token=abc123.... The AdminRegister.tsx page immediately reads the token from the URL query string and calls GET /api/admin-auth/validate-invite?token=abc123... before rendering anything. The backend looks up the token in the AdminInvite collection. If it does not exist, it returns 404. If it exists but isUsed is true, it returns 409. If the current time is past expiresAt, it returns 410. If everything is fine, it returns the lockedEmail and expiresAt so the frontend knows what to display.
Based on the response, the frontend shows one of four things. A full error screen if the token is invalid, expired, or already used. Or the registration form if the token is valid.
The recipient fills in their name, email, password, and optionally their university. If the invite was locked to a specific email, that field is pre-filled, visually marked as "Locked", and the input is disabled — they cannot change it. They submit the form.
The frontend calls POST /api/admin-auth/register with the token and all the form fields. The backend validates the token again (double check — never trust that the frontend validated it), confirms the email matches the lock if one exists, checks that no account with that email already exists, hashes the password with bcrypt at cost factor 12, creates the User document with role: 'admin', marks the AdminInvite document as isUsed: true and sets usedBy to the new user's ID, signs a JWT, and returns the user and token.
The frontend receives the response, shows a success screen for two seconds, then calls login() with the credentials to populate the AuthContext, and redirects to /admin.
The link is now dead. If anyone else tries to visit it, they see the "Already Used" error screen. The MongoDB TTL index also deletes expired unused invite documents automatically so they do not pile up.

What Happens If There Is No Admin At All
This is the bootstrapping problem and it is a real issue with invite-only systems. If every admin account requires an existing admin to create the invite, who creates the very first admin?
The answer is the seed script that was written earlier in this project. It is the designated escape hatch for this exact situation.
Open backend/src/seed.ts. It already exists and already does this:
typescriptconst admin = await User.create({
  name:     'Premium Scholars Admin',
  email:    'admin@premiumscholars.co.ke',
  password: hashed,
  role:     'admin',
})
You run it once, from your terminal, on the server or locally while connected to the database:
bashcd backend
npm run seed
That command creates the first admin account with these credentials:

Email: admin@premiumscholars.co.ke
Password: Admin@1234

You then log in with those credentials, immediately go to the admin panel, go to your profile or settings, and change the password to something strong that only you know. You then use that account to generate invite links for any other admins you need.
After running the seed script the first time, you should never run it again. It checks if (!existing) before creating anything, so running it twice will not create a duplicate, but there is no reason to run it again after the first admin exists.

What If You Are Already in Production With No Admin
If the seed script was never run and the database has no admin at all, you have three options in order of preference.
Option 1 — Run the seed script directly against the production database. Set your MONGO_URI environment variable to point at the production database and run npm run seed from your local machine or from the server. This is the cleanest approach. Change the password immediately after.
Option 2 — Manually create an admin via the MongoDB shell or Compass. Connect to your MongoDB instance with MongoDB Compass or mongosh. Run a command like this:
javascriptuse premium-scholars

db.users.insertOne({
  name:      "Admin",
  email:     "admin@premiumscholars.co.ke",
  password:  "$2a$12$...",   // bcrypt hash of your chosen password
  role:      "admin",
  isActive:  true,
  createdAt: new Date(),
  updatedAt: new Date(),
})
The problem with this approach is that you need a pre-hashed password. You cannot just type a plain text password into MongoDB and have it work — the login controller uses bcryptjs.compare() which only works against a proper bcrypt hash. To generate the hash, run this one-liner in Node:
bashnode -e "const b = require('bcryptjs'); b.hash('YourPasswordHere', 12).then(h => console.log(h))"
Copy the output hash into the MongoDB insert command above.
Option 3 — Add a temporary bootstrap endpoint. If you cannot access the database directly and cannot run the seed script, add a temporary route to the backend that creates an admin with a hardcoded secret. You would add something like this to app.ts:
typescript// TEMPORARY — REMOVE IMMEDIATELY AFTER USE
app.post('/api/bootstrap', async (req, res) => {
  const { secret } = req.body
  if (secret !== process.env.BOOTSTRAP_SECRET) {
    return res.status(403).json({ message: 'Forbidden' })
  }
  const existing = await User.findOne({ role: 'admin' })
  if (existing) {
    return res.status(409).json({ message: 'Admin already exists' })
  }
  const hashed = await require('./utils/password.utils').hashPassword('Admin@1234')
  const admin = await User.create({
    name: 'Bootstrap Admin', email: 'admin@premiumscholars.co.ke',
    password: hashed, role: 'admin', isActive: true,
  })
  return res.json({ message: 'Admin created', email: admin.email })
})
Set BOOTSTRAP_SECRET=some_very_long_random_string in your .env. Deploy. Call the endpoint once with that secret. Delete the endpoint. Redeploy. This is a last resort and you must remove it immediately — leaving a bootstrap endpoint in production is a critical security vulnerability.

Summary Table
SituationSolutionFirst deployment, fresh databaseRun npm run seedDevelopment environmentRun npm run seedProduction, no admin, DB accessibleRun seed script pointed at production DBProduction, no admin, DB accessible via CompassInsert user manually with bcrypt hashed passwordProduction, no admin, no DB accessTemporary bootstrap endpoint — delete immediately after useAdmin exists, need another adminUse the Admin Invites tab in the dashboard

Why Not Just Allow Admin Self-Registration
The reason the system is designed this way and not with a simple "register as admin" option is that admin accounts have destructive capabilities — they can delete any user, see all mentor and mentee data, edit all products, and publish content to every user of the platform. If anyone could register as admin by simply selecting a role or knowing a fixed code, one leaked piece of information would compromise the entire platform. The invite token approach means that even if someone knows the registration URL exists, they cannot use it without a valid cryptographically random token that expires and can only be generated by someone who is already authenticated as admin. The attack surface is as small as it can reasonably be while still being practical to use.